---
layout: post
title: Ibarra 2010 - Identity as Narrative
date: 2022-06-16 12:00:00 -0600
categories: [Comps]
tags: [comps, identity, identity work, narrative, role transition, authenticity, great paper]
---
[Google Scholar Link](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C45&q=Identity+as+narrative%3A+Prevalence%2C+effectiveness%2C+and+consequences+of+narrative+identity+work+in+macro+work+role+transitions&btnG=)

Ibarra, H., & Barbulescu, R. (2010). Identity as narrative: Prevalence, effectiveness, and consequences of narrative identity work in macro work role transitions. Academy of management review, 35(1), 135-154.

Aside from content, this theoretical paper is organized well and would serve as a good “template” for a theory paper.  Succinct definitions are at the start of sections and build iteratively on each other.  Finally, this paper cites several qualitative identity articles that seem interesting.

## Summary
An _identity_ is the “meaning[s] attached to an individual by the self and by others.”  _Identity work_ is what people do when they seek to make, change, or strengthen their identity.  _Narrative identity work_ is a specific type of identity work wherein a person crafts a story to meet their “identity aims.”  A _narrative_ is a sequentially arranged set of events that attempt to make a point.  A narrative takes disparate elements and forge them into a uniting purpose.

Identity work is engaged in especially during times of significant change (e.g., going to college).  This is especially true for _macro work role transitions_ - when organizational roles change (e.g., getting hired, fired, promoted).  During these times, people will attempt to explain these changes in a way that is consistent with their identity.  Incorporating events from their lives will result in a narrative that they will then present to society.  Identity work, in this regard, is a negotiation, society can reject or accept the story told them by a person.  The act of narrating one’s journey can shape our identity (“narrating the self changes the self”).  If a story is unsuccessful, a person will engage in identity work until they can present a story that both they and society accepts.  If a story is successful, a person will continue telling it, and it will likely be integrated into their identity.

## Application
This theory seems to give credence to the aphorism “fake it till you make it.”  In constructing a narrative, people draw on their _self-narrative repertoire_, “a register of terms and metaphors from which people draw selectively to characterize and evaluate actions and events.”  The same story can be told in different ways, and the way a narrative is presented will greatly influence its success.  Smaller changes (director to VP) are more believable than bigger changes (banker to candlemaker).  Upward transitions are also more believable.  If a story seems to show downward movement, it needs to be explained in terms of desirability (e.g., “In becoming a candlemaker, I was able to control my own schedule and follow my passions”).  Consistency will help provide authenticity (e.g., “many of the same skills I used in banking are useful in candlemaking”).  Coherence, or stories that make sense, increase believability.  Stories with higher protagonist agency will evoke more positive responses.  Archetypes and canonical themes will also enhance believability.  Here are some to add to your self-narrative repertoire: the “heroic quest”, a coming-of-age story, a rags-to-riches story, the “American dream,” and “wandering in the wilderness” before finding a purpose.  Finally, these stories should have a moral, as “[that] sets the standards against which the story can be evaluated.”  When we change a story to tell it to different people or in a new environment, too much change can be bad.