---
layout: post
title: Kreiner 2006 - On the edge of identity - Boundary dynamics at the interface of individual and organizational identities
date: 2022-06-16 12:00:00 -0600
categories: [Comps]
tags: [comps, identity, balance, boundaries, organizational identity, self-identity, theory, great paper]
---
[Google Scholar Link](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C45&q=On+the+edge+of+identity%3A+Boundary+dynamics+at+the+interface+of+individual+and+organizational+identities&btnG=)

Kreiner, G. E., Hollensbe, E. C., & Sheep, M. L. (2006). On the edge of identity: Boundary dynamics at the interface of individual and organizational identities. Human relations, 59(10), 1315-1341.

## Summary
In the proposed model of identity boundaries,  **external boundaries** refer to a boundary around a certain domain which serves to differentiate it from other domains.  For some policemen, putting on a uniform separates their professional life from their civilian life.  An **internal boundary** is a within-domain boundary that separates sub-domains.  An executive putting on “their boss hat” to cancel a personally important, yet inefficient, research program would be making use of such an internal boundary.  Put another way, external boundaries separate the “self from others,” while internal boundaries “differentiate internalized objects and representations.”  Boundaries are either strong (“thick”) or weak (“thin”). Strong boundaries more rigorously separate, while weak boundaries allow for permeability.

Aside from self-identities, _organizational identities_ (the degree to which a person feels their self-identity overlaps with the identity of an organization) are important to consider.  _Intra-identity boundaries_ refers to segmentation happening within an individual.  _Inter-identity boundaries_ refer to the segmentation between an individual and organizational boundary. Intra-identity boundary dynamics deal with the proportions of various aspects of self-identity.  Inter-identity boundary dynamics concern themselves with the degree of overlap between individual and organizational identities (handy chart on p. 11).

There are several types of boundary interactions.  _Intrusion_ refers to a boundary that is viewed as “too permeable.”  On an intra-identity level, this happens when one aspect of self-identity becomes too large (or small).  The example is given of a priest who doesn’t feel that they can swear while playing softball.  The “priest” aspect has become oversized and has begun to interfere with the “social” aspect of their life.  This phenomenon can also happen within organizations, such as when a company, in an effort to survive, has massive layoffs of their “employee family.”  Finally, intrusion can also occur between individual and organizational identities.  An out-of-balance work-life relationship is one such manifestation.  In all cases of intrusion, identity conflict will motivate change.

Another boundary dynamic is called **distance**, and refers to boundaries that are either too segmented or too strong (not permeable enough).  An actor, who out of necessity is also a waiter, might experience distance on an individual level if their waiter identity inhibits their actor identity (missing an audition for a shift).  This can also happen if aspects of self-identity are unable to reconcile themselves with one another.  On an organizational level, this can happen when organizational identity aspects clash.  The example is given of a university who wishes to output the best research, while simultaneously seeking to provide an education for all.  At this point, distance and intrusion seem, to me, similar.  The example I previously gave of a company conducting layoffs could also be thought of in terms of a distance framing.  Finally, distance is manifest between self-identity and organizational-identity when an individual yearns for “meaning” in their job.  In the examples given in the paper, the construct of distance seems to be related to aspirations, though this isn’t explicitly stated.  Aspirations do seem to infer a distance though, between our current selves and our aspirational, possible-future selves.  Distance results in identity conflict, which will motivate change.

Finally, **balance** involves reaching a steady state, or equilibrium.  Within an individual, this can involve interpreting various self-identity aspects not as dissonant, but as complementary.  A similar conceptualization can also be applied to organizational balance.  _Integration_ of individual and organizational boundaries results in _work-life balance_.

## Application
This paper makes several good points regarding application.  A more complete understanding of the various forces shaping an employee’s holistic identity can allow the manager to better motivate them.  They also suggest that managers should promote identifying with varying aspects of the organization, depending on the individual.